final-final edit pass (#8)
alice-i-cecile/rfcs: rfcs/45-stageless.md

## Summary

Users often have a hard time working with Bevy's system scheduling API.

> Core building blocks—stages, run criteria, and states—are presented as independent but actually have tons of hidden internal coupling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Core building blocks — stages, run criteria, and states — are presented as independent but actually have tons of hidden internal coupling.

```

This coupling frequently comes to bite users in the form of surprising limitations, unexpected side effects, and indecipherable errors.

This RFC proposes a holistic redesign that neatly fixes these problems, with clear boundaries between system configuration, storage, execution, and flow control.

> It can summarized as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary:
```

}

#[derive(SystemLabel)]
enum MySystemSets {
    Menu,
    SubMenu,
}

#[derive(SystemLabel)]
enum MyLabels {
    FlushMenu,
}

fn main() {
    App::new()
        /* ... */
        .add_set(
            // use the same builder API for scheduling systems and system sets
            MySystemSets::Menu
                // put sets in other sets
                .in_set(CoreSet::Update)
                // give sets conditions (if one fails, all systems in the set will be skipped)
                .run_if(state_equals(GameState::Paused))
        )
        .add_system(
            some_system
                .in_set(MySystemSets::Menu)

>                 // things can have multiple conditions! (they must all return true)
>                 // while being in a set! (there are no conflicts)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                // systems and sets can have multiple conditions, which must all return true.
```

Author: So here, I was trying to highlight that something can have multiple conditions, while being in a system set that also has conditions. Neither of these things are possible in current Bevy.

Reviewer 2: Can you at least rework the second line? It doesn't really make sense grammatically

Author: Sure, I can do that.

        .add_plugins(DefaultPlugins)
        // You can add functions with read-only system parameters as conditions.
        .add_set(GameSet::Construction.run_if(construction_timer_not_finished))
        .add_systems(
            systems![tick_construction_timer, update_construction_progress]
                .in_set(GameSet::Construction))
        .add_system(mitigate_meltdown.run_if(too_many_enemies))
        // We can use closures for simple one-off conditions.
        .add_system(spawn_more_enemies.run_if(|difficulty: Res<Difficulty>| difficulty >= 9000))

>         // `resource_exists` and `resource_equals` are helper functions that capture
>         // variables in simple closures that can be converted into conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // `resource_exists` and `resource_equals` are helper functions which produce
        // new closures that can be used as run conditions.

```

Author: I changed "systems" to "closures", (just trying to avoid any confusion), but this is good.

        .add_system(gravity.run_if(resource_exists(Gravity)))

>         // Conditions can be attached to system sets, so you can skip every the whole set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Conditions can be attached to system sets, so you can skip the whole set.

```

    fn build(app: &mut App) {
        app
        .add_system(spawn_projectiles.before(CoreSystem::FlushPostUpdate))
        .add_systems(
            chain![
                check_if_projectiles_hit,
                despawn_projectiles_that_hit,

>                 // wherever you want to commands to be applied, insert an instance of `apply_system_buffers`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                // wherever you want commands to be applied, insert an instance of `apply_system_buffers`

```

- Remove stages and run criteria.
- Misc.
  - Implement bulk scheduling capabilities (`.add_systems`, descriptor wrapper enum, and convenience macros like `chain!`)
    - Rebrand "system chaining" (e.g. `ChainSystem`) into something else, like "system piping".

## Drawbacks

1. Migration: These will be major breaking changes for every Bevy user.
    - Every app and plugin will need to migrate to the new API and it doesn't share much with the old API.
2. Letting exclusive systems out of their designated insertion points makes it easier to accidentally divide large groups of parallel systems.
3. A simple state machine is a reduction in functionality compared to the state stack.
    - The proposed `apply_state_transition::<S>` system performs one transition, not an unbounded cycle.
    - There are no equivalents to:
      - `on_inactive_update`
      - `on_in_stack_update`
      - `on_pause`
      - `on_resume`
      - etc.
4. It may become harder for users to understand their app at a glance.
    - Particularly understanding when commands are processed and understanding what conditions guard a system when it belongs to multiple system sets.

>     - Clear, concise error messages and graph visualization tools will become even more important than now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Clear, concise error messages and graph visualization tools will become even more important.
```

4. "Command-flushed" ordering constraints (dependencies that will ensure the pair is separated by command application).

There are also lots of related but non-urgent areas for follow-up research:

1. Improve tools for reporting and resolving system execution order ambiguities.
2. Revisit plugin definition and plugin configuration.
3. Cloning registered systems. (This probably warrants its own RFC, but it fits with the multiple worlds discussion.)
4. Add [manual dependency graph construction](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2381) methods.
5. Support forcing system execution orders: useful for debugging system order bugs and optimization work.
6. Move command queues into the `World` so that exclusive systems can drain them directly (i.e. in some user-defined order).
7. Enable conditions in arbitrary boolean expressions.
8. Support automatic insertion and removal of systems to reduce schedule clutter and support other forms of one-off logic.
9. Run schedules without `&mut World`, inferring access based on the systems inside.

## Appendix

> Moved all these implementation ideas/details here because it was cluttering the RFC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These implementation ideas/details are here to avoid cluttering the RFC.

```
